#tut01_130917

TA: Tomo

Tutorial#: T5101

"**I could care less.**"

This is wrong because it should be "**I couldn't care less.**"

Prescriptive or Descriptive?

>This is prescriptive, like "how we should say" following the English grammar. Prescriptivists believe that there is a set of rules that divides all the English speaking into correct grammar and incorrect one.

---

1. I better watch my grammar around you! [prescriptive use of grammar]
2. Please proofread your paper for grammar and style. [prescriptive]
3. I'm enrolled in a class on Finnish grammar. [prescriptive, a set of rules that you are learning, it's usually the standard dialect that you learn]
4. There have been three very good grammars written about Inuktitut. [descriptive]
5. The grammar of Icelandic is very interesting to linguists. [descriptive]

>if you are writing a grammar book, you are describing it, so it's descriptive; but if you learn a language with a grammar book, you are prescriptive.

---

Subject: a noun phrase, usually at the beginning of a sentence, conducting a behaviour or action.

John kissed Mary.

"John" is the subject. "Mary" is the object.

Object: ...

**Becky and I** vs **Becky and me**

Prescriptively speaking, they are both right, depending on where they are located. Specifically speaking, "Becky and I" is correct as a subject, while "Becky and me" is correct as an object.

>Becky and me watched the leafs game.

This is prescriptively incorrect, but lots of people also say this.

>Derek saw Becky and I.

this is a **hypercorrection** (trying to be correct but not really…)

another example for hypercorrection: *who/whom*

###summary
				formal		informal

	subject		Becky and I		Becky and I/me
	object		Becky and me/I	Becky and me
	

---

