
#a1
##Rui Qiu - 'not Rachel' - 4th year Maths specialist

Not preferrable though, the correct pronunciation of my name is pretty much like 'Rachel'; I would be grateful if you just call me Rui/Ray. I'm in 4th year international student from China and currently doing an extra major in CSC. The special skill that I can contribute to my group, would be my versatility. Although study as a science-major student, I personally am a big fun of arts. I can play the clarinet and paint as well. My goal for this course is to get some understanding in HCI, and hopefully this would be my focus in graduate school. For work style, I prefer focusing on a single task, since I always have a steady pace. I like to check from time to time, 'look before I leap'. I hope to work with people who are organized and with strong ability in presentation. And last but not least, would like to participate in the contest.

For most of MAT&STA courses, no group work is required. So based on my limited experience in group work with other students (CSC108, 148), I find it a quite exciting way to study. It usually merges different idea so that I can learn from other members, however at the same time, it comes with inevitable conflicts especially in the ‘combining phase’. When this does happen, if it is an argument on a technical basis, I prefer solving it by running different trials; or if it is on a general basis, for example, about general direction of research, I consider voting as a better solution. And I strongly suggest that a group should use team communication application, such as Slack when doing a project, rather than use inefficient texting/emails.

The problem space I'm interested in is a better text-editing experience on mobile devices. Specifically speaking, when we move a sentence to another place, say while editing an article, we firslty press the first word and hold it, then drag the cursor to the last word in that sentence. Afterwards, press the highlighted sentence and select ‘Cut’, finally we go to the desired position and tap again and ‘Paste’. This method is definitely better than type it out again, especially when the sentence is pretty long. My idea is to use gestures recognition instead, simply underline the target sentence, then draw an arrow to its new position and it’s done. So basically the target audience would be those people who write or take notes on mobile devices very often. Especially in a lecture, it would prevent you from being distracted and keep pace with the instructor.

##[BAD] - Control Center in iOS 7 (and later) 

I would like to discuss the Control Center in iOS. Honestly, it's a great improvement in the development of iOS, making the accessibilty to many functions easier and more efficient. However, from my point of view, it's still not a perfect design. And if we put it together with what we already can do in jailbreak community, it looks worse.

Basically two aspects make it bad. Firstly, some functions in CC are redundant, such as calculator and alarm, since you can always switch to these apps using Siri. And comparing with others, they will be used less frequently. Secondly, some every useful functions are not included in CC. The switch of VPN is a typical example. It takes steps to turn on/off VPN now, but this could be done with a simple tap in CC.

So, my idea to fix this interface is to make the customization of CC possible, just like what we can do with Notification Center. By customizing CC, we can add more functions in it (by swipeing left or right), remove useless functions, and change the order of switchers as we like to.